---
layout: post
title: 'Game of War: A theists cellular automaton'
joomla_id: 60
joomla_url: game-of-war
date: 2010-10-14 07:48:46.000000000 +01:00
comments: true
---

This is an extension of Conway's Game of Life in which there is more than one
player (colour) and a fifth rule.  To win the game (or be winning) you must have
more of your own cells on the board than your opponent does.

From Wikipedia, here are the rules to the original Game of Life

1.  Any live cell with fewer than two live neighbours dies, as if caused by
    under-population.
2.  Any live cell with more than three live neighbours dies, as if by
    overcrowding.
3.  Any live cell with two or three live neighbours lives on to the next
    generation.
4.  Any dead cell with exactly three live neighbours becomes a live cell, as if by
    reproduction.

Now we introduce colours and an extra rule.  Two two cells are friendly if they
are the same colour:

1.  Any live cell with fewer than two live friendly neighbours dies, as if by
    loneliness.
2.  Any live cell with more than three live friendly neighbours dies, as if by
    overcrowding.
3.  Any live cell with two or three friendly neighbours lives, unchanged, to the
    next generation (unless it dies at number 4).
4.  Any live cell with strictly more enemy than friendly neighbours, dies.
5.  Any dead cell with exactly three mutually friendly neighbours and no other
    live neighbours comes to life.

As you can see, when only the cells of one player are involved, these are the
rules of the Game of Life.  When there are enemies, majority wins!

{swf;http://alejandroerickson.com/joomla/images/swf/game_of_life.swf}
