---
layout: post
title: 'How to make Hexastix: Detailed photo instructions.'
thumbnail: '/images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image32.jpg'
joomla_id: 90
joomla_url: how-to-make-hexastix-detailed-photo-instructions
date: 2011-09-27 21:19:06.000000000 +01:00
comments: true
---

#  How to make a Hexastix, like George Hart’s “72 pencils”. 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image47.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

## Shoutout to Matt Parker's [standupmaths](http://standupmaths.com/ "Matt Parker's Standup Maths") fans!##

Say hi in the comments if you came here from Matt's video!

{% include youtube.html id="DelH1S32dOg" %}


###    About Hexastix: 

If you haven’t seen George Hart’s sculptures before, you need to go check him
out:
[http://www.georgehart.com/sculpture/pencils.html](http://www.georgehart.com/sculpture/pencils.html)
.  And while you are at it, go see his daughter’s site too,
[vihart.com](http://www.vihart.com) .  Hexastix, and this method of
construction, were introduced to me by Matt DeVos, a mathematician at Simon
Fraser University.  The word hexastix refers to infinitely regular hexagonal
prisms - hexagonal sticks.  The idea is that if you filled every hole in this
configuration, and expanded your Hexastix forever, the result fills 75% of space
(I think), and has some crazy symmetry group described in “The Symmetry of
Things”, by Conway, Burgiel, and Goodman-Strauss.

They are challenging at first, but easy once you get the hang of it.  Hexastix
make great ornaments and gifts! Here are a few that I have made:

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image08.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image66.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image54.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image32.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

And here are the rest of them...

{% include image.html
img="http://farm7.static.flickr.com/6179/6198346259_28e0b792a5_z.jpg"
external="true"
title="Hexastix arrangement all"
caption="Hexastix arrangement all by Alejandro Erickson, on Flickr"
url="http://www.flickr.com/photos/alejandroerickson/6198346259/"
%}

 Your sticks and elastics might differ a little from mine.  This video will also
 help:

{% include youtube.html id="2WtyMP1n5Js" %}

###    Materials  : 

1.   A supply of sticks in 4 colours.  This hexastix uses 18 sticks of each
     colour, but you need a few extras for breakage and stuff.
2.   8 small elastics. 
3.   A poker thingy, like a pointed skewer. 
4.   (optional, not shown) white glue, water, ziplock bag, human powered
     centrifuge.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image15.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Fasten 7 orange sticks together with an elastic at each end.  I double my
elastics so they stay on, but aren’t tight.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image10.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image20.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Now add four blue sticks 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image03.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}
   
The blue sticks go between the orange ones, separating orange into sets of 2, 3,
2\.  Fasten the blue sticks together with doubled elastics at each end.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image64.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image19.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Add four purple sticks

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image36.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

The blue sticks separated the orange ones into a 2,3,2 configuration.  The
purple sticks will do that too, but in a different direction.  The old 2,3,2
separation is shown with blue lines, and the new 2,3,2 separation (by purple) is
shown with black lines.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image67.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

The purple sticks also go between the blue sticks, separating them into 2,2. 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image17.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Here it is again from the ends of orange, and the ends of blue. 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image41.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image61.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Put an elastic around each end of purple. 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image44.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

####    This is the key step.   

Look down the end of orange and identify the 2,3,2 separations.  One of them has
blue sticks between the sets, another has purple sticks, and there is one more,
shown in white, with no sticks separating the sets of 2,3,2\. There is one more
way to split the orange sticks into sets of 2,3,2, and that is what the pink
sticks do.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image13.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image57.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}



The pink sticks need to alternate properly with blues, and purples too, so there
is a trick to inserting them.   Rotate the above configuration away from you, so
that you now hold orange vertically, looking down the future pink direction.
 Put your thumbs on the ends of the blue and purple sticks nearest you, and your
middle fingers on the bottom end of orange.  Pull orange toward you, and push
down on the blue and purple sticks. This should reveal six-sided holes for
inserting pink!

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image30.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Insert 7 pink sticks into the holes.  It does not matter which holes you choose,
and it’s OK that some holes are open on one side.  Make sure that all pink
sticks are parallel to each other.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image68.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image27.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Put elastics around the ends of pink.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image28.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Complete the blue and purple colours by adding three of each stick.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image60.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

To add a blue stick, tuck it under the elastic, and push it into a hole.  As
long as it is parallel to the other blues, it is in a valid hole.  You need to
lift the elastic on the other end with a skewer to tuck the stick under that one
too.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image04.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image22.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Here is the finished blue.  Some blue sticks are not really in “holes”, but
that’s OK because they are held in place by the elastics.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image49.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

After you have done the same thing with purple,   you have constructed a Level 1 Hexastix.  Congratulations! 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image16.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Expand it, starting with blue.  You need about 6 blue sticks.  The end of blue
forms a hexagon, and you will expand it starting with the corners.  Locate the
hole that is straight out and nearest each corner.  Notice that there are two
corners that cannot be expanded (marked with x).  This always happens with the
first colour or two that we expand, and can be fixed later.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image07.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image56.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Again, tuck the blue stick under the elastic, push it through the hole, and use
a skewer to lift the elastic at the other end.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image52.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image22.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Here is blue with the corners expanded.  Next, we expand the sides of blue.

  {% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image09.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image50.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Use extra sticks to build the sides of the hexagon, and then remove sticks from
the middle, OR take them from the middle and move them to the outside.  Whatever
is easiest for you.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image05.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image58.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Here is the expanded blue.  Notice that I have left the original “middle” blue
stick.  It serves as a reference point later.  We will make blue into a regular
hexagon after doing the other colours.

  {% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image53.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

You might find a second colour that also can’t be expanded on every corner of
the hexagon, like orange here.  Keep looking at other colours until you find one
that can be expanded on every corner.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image29.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image33.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Expand the corners of pink with 6 sticks.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image18.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image34.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Expand the sides of pink and remove the inner sticks, except the middle one.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image45.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image59.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Expand orange and purple the same way.  As the Hexastix gets larger, you need to
be careful that the sticks go under all elastics when you push them through.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image63.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image42.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

When pink, orange, and purple have been expanded, go back and fix blue.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image06.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image69.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Congratulations!   Your Hexastix is now Level 2. 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image02.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Use the skewer to make your elastics single.  Don’t worry if you break an
elastic.  Just replace it with a new one before removing any others.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image00.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image23.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Time to expand blue again.  And again, there are two places that cannot be
expanded yet.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image37.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image62.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Now expand pink... 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image35.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image26.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Expand orange and purple... Be careful to tuck those sticks UNDER all elastics. 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image31.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image24.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

If you need to justify the orange sticks, set the end of orange down on the
table, and push the other colours down.  Don’t forget to fix blue after
expanding all other colours!

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image38.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image39.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

When you cannot expand the Hexastix any more, remove the middle sticks of each colour 

  {% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image48.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image01.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

##    Congratulations! You now have a Level 3 Hexastix! 

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image12.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

You can leave it this way if you want to, or you can glue it so that the
elastics can be removed. If you leave it, keep it out of the sun so that the
elastics don’t degrade so fast.

###    Optional stuff: 

Mix water and white glue so that it is liquidy, but gluie, and put enough of it
in a bag to coat the Hexastix.  Put the Hexastix in too.  Seal the bag and shake
it by cupping the Hexastix carefully in your hands.  Don’t hit anything with it,
or your Hexastix could fall apart!  The Hexastix should be coated in glue.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image14.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image51.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

To remove the excess glue, put the Hexastix into a container that you will spin
around yourself with a rope.  I’ve used a milk jug, with a rope tied to the
handle.  You can also use an old towel, by holding the four corners. Do the
spinning outside, because if you hit something with the Hexastix, it can break.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image21.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image25.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

Make sure there isn’t too much glue under the elastics, because this will make a
little mark when it dries.  Wipe them with a Q-tip if you really want a nice
finish.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image65.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image46.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

When the glue dries, remove the elastics.  Be careful here: if you remove them
too soon, your Hexastix falls apart and you can’t really fix it because it is
clogged with glue, and if you wait too long, your elastics might get stuck.  I
waited about 12 hours, and the elastics came off but the Hexastix was fragile.
 If the elastics left a mark that you don’t like, you can do another coat of
glue, or acrylic medium (available from art supply stores).  Make sure it is
extra dry before applying a second coat.  The shaking could dislodge a stick if
it isn’t dry.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image40.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image43.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

The process is the same for glue-water and acrylic, except that the acrylic
medium will make bubbles which you must remove by blowing sharply on them.  Here
is the finish after applying one coat of glue, and one coat of acrylic medium.

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image55.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

{% include image.html
img="images/images/stories/hexastix/instructions/image11.jpg"
title=""
caption=""
%}

##    FIN! 
